Trying to fall asleep lastnight, I started listening to the most appropriate podcast.
The guest was Adam Gazzelay on Sam Harris's making sense podcast.
Gazzelay is the author of the book "The distracted Mind", which is on its way here.
He is a nueroscientist, tech entrapanuer, and thoughtful writer/speaker.

One of the main points I latched onto which sounds like is a big part of the book is:
Human nature is about foraging for information. We have evolved to seek information that will help us survive.
This has become pretty abstracted the more technology seperates us from Nature (my/rifkin addition)
Instead of the information we seek being obvously connected to our survival (like which berries are poisonous)
We scan articles and watch tv for pop culture information or other socially relevant info.
We read parts of books to try to get the main ideas so we can move on.

There is a sense of urgency in our DNA that makes us search for the most relevant info. 
We just are getting further and further from what that is. So we jump from thing to thing in the paradox of choice. 
Boredom has somehow become both impossible and more constant. We rarely bask in the boredom we used to feel all the time. 
I was born in 1981, so although I had tv, we only had a few channels and it wasn't always aiming for my attention. 

Another main point in Gazzelas book is the concept of bottom-up vs top-down attention/focus
a bottom-up attention is the natural reaction to external or internal stimulus that triggers a reaction. 
Like someone saying your name or a lion growling behind you. 
Also, something like your stomach growling is a bottom-up internal stimulation. 

Top-down is the things we want to focus on. Choosing to read a book or practice an instrument. 
We have to try to hold focus on a thing while inside and outside factors are constantly bartering for our attention. 
Now that I have a kid this is even more an issue. 
But its interesting in our modern world because our mental dialog is often reminiscent of fast scrolling social media.
The internal distractions are bad enough. And are probably getting worse. 

So aside from limiting screen time for myself and my son, I'm trying to challenge myself on "singal-tasking"
with the compulsion to multi-task to save time we are falling into a trap of unraveling our ability to focus. 
Single-tasking is a thing most of us strive for if we are thoughtful practicers. 
Meditation is very revealing, but anyone who has spent a lot of time practicing an instrument will know the benifits of "flow"
I feel like is was Sacks who popularized the term "flow"

And all the good learners either very intentionally harness this. Or intuatively understand and do it. 
This makes me think of Josh Watzkin.. the searching for bobby fisher kid who wrote the book "the art of learning"
He went from chess prodigy to pushhands master to now diving deep into surfing. 
And to some extent the thing he chooses to pursue is almost irrelevant. 
I mean, surfing is maybe the perfect thing to go after if you want be forced to achieve "flow". 
Maybe race car driving or rock climbing. These physical things that demand your full attention. 
Do you think racecar drivers are digesting podcasts as they go around that oval?

So turn notifications off and try to do something for some solid period of time. 
There are studies that show when we side tangent from a task we loose significant time. 
Babystep your way towards long practice. Start with 10 minute goals broken up not by social media, but by a relaxing stretch or looking at nature. 
Meditation can also greatly improve focus mental health. 

An important point that we seem to hear, but not let deeply sink in is the idea of Nueroplasticity. 
Everything we do changes our brain. The thoughts we think, the images we see, the behaviors we cultivate. 
And our chaotic minds become screamingly obvious when we try to exist without reaching for a distraction. 
People don't sit in lobbies or wait in line without looking at their phone these days. It is very rare for someone under 40. but also older people have caught on. 
If you look around while driving, its insane how many people are looking at their phone. And not just at red lights!

We know we can always access something that gives us that little dopamine rush. The reward system in our brain is wired to search for it. 
To forage for it.. like a squirl does accorns. 
There is actually a mathmatical model that calculates the probability of how long a forager will stay in one place with finite resources. 
The example Gazzelay uses in the podcast which I like is 
"If a squirl has eaten half of the acorns in a tree and the other tree is really far away, he will stay and eat the rest of the acorns in his tree.
but if a tree filled with acorns is a jump away, he will fly himself right over to the full tree"

Humans in our current environment seemingly have an endless supply of information acorns and we can just keep jumping from tree to tree. 
Nothing is inherently bad about being able to access the ininite amount of information in the world, 
but if its changing our brains to be able to focus less deeply... I would say thats a problem. At least a problem I don't want. 

So I'm trying my best to resist the easy urges. Even intermittent fasting is a good example. 
Just becasue your stomach growls doesn't mean you have to immediately put food in your mouth. 
there is more and more evidence about the benifits of fasting
I know from my own experience that resisting eating when I first crave it makes me feel much more powerful and focused. 

Ok, I'm going to shift gears and go focus on something else. 












